---
layout: post
title: "Understanding Machine Learning"
date: 2025-03-07 09:45:00 -0800
categories: 
   - testing
---
Artificial intelligence (AI) is the simulation of human intelligence by machines. Machine learning (ML) is a subset of AI that applies math to large data to find patterns by mapping inputs and outputs, giving outputs without needing to be programmed.

ML stores inputs and outputs in a mathematical model. These algorithms have been around since the 1950s, but with the advent of large data, finding ways to process this data is increasingly significant to discern meaningful trends. Cloud computing also provides scalability and accessibility in ways that did not previously exist, such as large graphics processing units (GPU) resources being available through Cloud Computing as a Service platforms.

ML is built on mathematical concepts including linear alegbra, basic mathematical equations, calculus, probability, and statistics. It also requires a basic knowledge of programming in Python to utilize the libraries necessary for running ML programs.

There are multiple common techniques for ML including:
  --Reinforcement Learning
  --Supervised Learning
  --Unsupervised Learning

Supervised learning is used to train an ML model with labeled data where the inputs and opuputs are known. As the ML model receives new inputs, it can predict future outputs based on that data. An example is housing data, where big sets of information are available on a home owner's age, location, the room number, income, crime rates, among others. Which factors are most likely to predict the value of the home? The machine studies the labeled data to find the patterns and predict home values based on them. This a type of regression problem that predicts continuious numerical values.

Classification techniques are used for categorical data, where there are discrete boxes for data elements to fit within a larger set. These include boolean (binary) responses like yes/no or multiple categorizations or classes, such as a plant or animal species.

Unsupervised learning groups data only based on the input, but not the output. Principal component analysis (PCA) is an example of unsupervised ML since it reduces data dimensionality to find essential patterns via "principal components." Data clustering is another method used to take large data and segment it into distinct subgroups for easier marketing and competitive advantage.

Reinforcement learning, or "trial-and-error" learning, is where the machine learns by making mistakes. It does not rely on a defined data set, and is more similar to conditioning an animal to perform tricks. An example is the rat that learned how to play the video game Doom, where the rat received sugar water for performing positive actions like progressing through the level and killing enemies and a puff of air to the face when performing negative actions like hitting walls. Reinforcement learning is also behind chess engines such as Stockfish and Komodo.

Traditional ML techniques include:
  --Regression
  --Decision Trees
  --Random forests
  --Clustering

Traditional ML is beneficial here because of its efficiency. If you do not need to use an advanced reinforcement model when you could use a traditional technique, it is easier to implement and there are fewer failure points. They train faster, cost less to maintain, and can be deployed anywhere. Traditional ML can also be used to explain WHY predictions were made more effectively since you can explain the program's reasoning, unlike the black box nature of more complex techniques. Traditional ML also does not requires as intensive GPU resources, making it more scalable. Traditional ML is significant because it is a the foundational bedrock of ML: gathering data, cleaning it, training, evaluating performance, and improving over time.
