---
layout: post
title: "1.4 Preparing Data for Machine Learning"
date: 2026-03-19 12:00:00 -0800
categories:
   - machinelearning
---

During the machine learning (ML) process, the model will look over the data multiple times to identify the key trends. Each iterative search through the data is called an "epoch", and the trends uncovered in a mathematical model. The number of epochs used is a key "hyperparameter", or an external configuration setting, which can result in a better model.

A typical data split is 80% for training and 20% for evaluating performance. While training on this 80%, a "loss function" measures how "good" the model is at predicting an expected value. It is how far an estimated value is from the actual value. Loss functions are only used to optimize training. It is NOT used to judge overall performance. The model is then evaluated with 20% of the reserved dataset that it has not seen before. Standard loss function evaluation metrics include mean squared error (MSE), accuracy, F1 score, area under the curve (AUC), R-squred, among others. This indicates if the hyperparameters require slight changes and to restart the training process to improve performance.

  -Linear regression is used to solve regression problems to predict numeric values. Lihenar equations identify a relationship between dependent and independent variables by fitting it to a regression line.  

  -Logistic regression is used for classification problems, not regressions. It predicts probabilities with binary boolean values, such as true or false. The output values will lie between 0 to 1, where 1 is closer to the desired value and 0 is further away.  

  -Decision trees are used for classification and regression problems. It separates data based on features into a decision making branch. The flow producing the best prediction is uncovered. If the branch is not relevant, it is removed. Tree depth can be configured with hyperparameters. An example is alpha-beta pruning search algorithm employed by chess engines like Stockfish, which eliminates suboptimal branches in the game tree.  

  -Random Forest is a set of decision trees, where there are multiple trees created from different row samples, and each tree makes individual predictions. All predictions are averaged together into a final result. 

The logistic regression learning algorithm is used to resolve classification problems and predict probability with binary values based on independent variables. A sample exercise reviews stop-and-search data from the United Kingdom, with the dataset consisting of different independent variables as features to predict if a stop leads to an arrest. Processing the data entails inputing missing values with K Nearest Neightbors (KNN), one-hot encoding categorical data, removing outliers, and combining highly correlated features.

Regression algorithms are used to predict numeric values. Three common regression algorithsm include: Linear regression, RandomForestREgressor, and XGBoost. It is possible to take features of a property, train an ML model, and use it to predict the selling price. A similar protocol must be performed as above to process the raw data by inputting missing vlaues, using one-hot encoding for categorical data, removing outliers, and combining correlated features. Available libraries for this end include Scikit-learn linear regression, RAndomForestRegressor, and XGBoost. The housing data is assessed with the R^2 metric, which is the amount of variation across the dataset, and this indicates the performance of a regression model between actual and predicted values. Different algorithms perform differently on the same dataset without changing any data. XGBoost generally performs with higher accuracy than other regression models, but may have tradeoffs with greater complexity than other linear regression models.

Machines also learn via "unsupervised learning" when the model is left to its own devices to classify unlabeled data. Unsupervised learning is interesting since the model may uncover trends not previously characterized with supervised learning. Clustering is an unsupervised technique. K-Means is a clustering algorithm that groups data closs to the average. K-Means finds commonalities and puts data points into a cluster. "K" in this context is the number of clusters for segmented data, and is a hyperparameter. Determining the appropriate cluster number, K, is critical and may require experimentation or the "elbow method." The "elbow method" assesses the point when increasing K values gives diminishing returns on classification, represented by a sharp decline followed by a plateu that resembles a bent elbow.

Companies often segment customers into distinct groups for targeted advertising, and marketing is tailored to those specific groups. An example is the YouTube or Spotify algorithm, which identifies what types of people tend to intake specific videos or music, and recommend similar media that aligns with what other people like them watch. The benefit for a company is that it strengthens customer loyalty and competitive advantages. 

Text classification is another unsupervised method falling under "Natural Language Processing." This is used to organize and structure text data. The document may be tagged with categories such as "correct" and "incorrect" or "positive" and "negative." An applied example is sentiment analysis. In the financial world, investors use sentiment analysis to assess the tone of mass media to determine if the market landscape is bullish (positive) or bearish (negative). 

Word2Vec is a learning algorithm that creates "embeddings", text represented as a vector. One word is transformed into a numerical representation to find closer similarities. Terms like "Woman/Princess/Queen" and "Man/Prince/King" are more likely be closer to each other than words like "Tree", "Dog", or "Trench" since those latter words are not as directly affiliated with humans as royal titles. However, since Word2Vec assigns one word to one vector, it has limits. It may not capture context about homonyms such as "Bass" the fish and "Bass" the instrument. Large language models (LLMs) use transformer-based neural networks to assess a word based on surrounding words in the rest of the sentence, and assigns mathematical probabilities to word interpretations based on patterns in the training set.
